README.md, before:

<div align="center">

# Omni-RLM

### A High-Performance Recursive Language Model Framework

[![Zig](https://img.shields.io/badge/Zig-0.15.2-orange.svg)](https://ziglang.org/)

*Leverage the power of recursive reasoning in AI agents with type-safe, high-performance Zig*

[Overview](#-overview) •
[Features](#-features) •
[Installation](#installation) •
[Quick Start](#-quick-start) •
[Examples](#-usage-examples) •
[Project Structure](#-project-structure) •
[Documentation](#-documentation)

</div>

---

## 📖 Overview

Omni-RLM is a **high-performance [recursive language model framework](https://github.com/alexzhang13/rlm)** that enables AI agents to perform complex reasoning tasks through controlled recursive LLM calls. Built with Zig's zero-cost abstractions and memory safety features, it provides a robust foundation for production-grade AI applications.

### Why Omni-RLM?

- 🚀 **Blazing Fast**: Leveraging Zig's zero-cost abstractions and manual memory management for optimal performance
- 🔄 **Recursive Reasoning**: Support for multi-depth language model calls with fine-grained control
- 📝 **Production-Ready Logging**: Comprehensive structured logging for debugging and analysis
- 🔌 **Backend Agnostic**: Works with any OpenAI-compatible API (OpenAI, Qwen, Anthropic, etc.)
- 🎯 **Type-Safe**: Compile-time guarantees prevent runtime errors
- 💾 **Memory Efficient**: Explicit allocator control for predictable resource usage

## ✨ Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Recursive Execution** | Execute language models with configurable recursion depth limits |
| **Query Tracking** | Automatic tracking of context length, type, and metadata |
| **Iteration Logging** | JSON-formatted logs for every iteration with full traceability |
| **Backend Flexibility** | Easy integration with OpenAI, Qwen, or any compatible LLM-API spec |
| **Memory Safety** | Built-in protection against memory leaks and undefined behavior |
| **Custom Prompts** | Override system prompts for specialized agent behaviors |

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- [Zig](https://ziglang.org/download/) 0.15.2 or later
- Python package `dill` for code execution environment

## 🚀 Quick Start

Here's a simple example to get you started:

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const RLM = @import("rlm.zig").RLM;
const RLMLogger = @import("rlm_logger.zig").RLMLogger;

pub fn main() !void {
    const allocator = std.heap.page_allocator;

    // Initialize logger
    const logger = try RLMLogger.init("./logs", "quickstart", allocator);

    // Configure RLM instance
    var rlm: RLM = .{
        .backend = "openai",
        .backend_kwargs = 
        \\{
        \\"base_url":"https://dashscope.aliyuncs.com/compatible-mode/v1/chat/completions",
        \\"api_key":"your-api-key-here",
        \\"model_name":"qwen-plus"
        \\}
        ,
        .environment = "local",
        .environment_kwargs = "{}",
        .max_depth = 1,
        .logger = logger,
        .allocator = allocator,
    };

    try rlm.init();
    defer rlm.deinit();

    // Make a completion request
    const prompt = "Print me the first 100 powers of two, each on a newline.";
    const p = try allocator.dupe(u8, prompt);
    defer allocator.free(p);
    
    const result = try rlm.completion(p, null);
    defer allocator.free(result.response);
    
    std.debug.print("Response: {s}\n", .{result.response});
    std.debug.print("Execution Time: {d}ms\n", .{result.execution_time});
}
```

## 💡 Usage Examples

### Configuring Different Backends

<details>
<summary><b>OpenAI GPT-4</b></summary>

```zig
var rlm: RLM = .{
    .backend = "openai",
    .backend_kwargs = 
    \\{
    \\"base_url":"https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions",
    \\"api_key":"sk-...",
    \\"model_name":"gpt-4"
    \\}
    ,
    .max_depth = 3,
    .max_iterations = 50,
    .allocator = allocator,
};
```
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Qwen (Alibaba Cloud)</b></summary>

```zig
var rlm: RLM = .{
    .backend = "openai",
    .backend_kwargs = 
    \\{
    \\"base_url":"https://dashscope.aliyuncs.com/compatible-mode/v1/chat/completions",
    \\"api_key":"sk-...",
    \\"model_name":"qwen-plus"
    \\}
    ,
    .max_depth = 2,
    .allocator = allocator,
};
```
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Custom Backend</b></summary>

```zig
var rlm: RLM = .{
    .backend = "openai",
    .backend_kwargs = 
    \\{
    \\"base_url":"https://your-custom-api.com/v1/chat/completions",
    \\"api_key":"your-api-key",
    \\"model_name":"your-model"
    \\}
    ,
    .custom_system_prompt = "You are a specialized coding assistant...",
    .allocator = allocator,
};
```
</details>

### Working with Logs

The logger creates structured JSON logs that include:

```json
{
  "prompt": [{"role":"Your prompt concat with system message"}...],
  "response": "Model response",
  "code_blocks": {
    "code": "extracted code blocks if any",
    "results": {
        "stdout": "output from code execution",
        "stderr": "error output if any",
        "term": "exit status"
    }
  },
  "final_answer": "Extracted final answer if any",
  "execution_time": 1234//milliseconds
}
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
rlm-zig/
├── rlm.zig              # Core RLM orchestrator
├── rlm_logger.zig       # Structured logging system
├── types.zig            # Type definitions and structs
├── prompt.zig           # Prompt construction utilities
├── parsing.zig          # Response parsing (code blocks, answers)
├── Model_info.zig       # Model configuration and metadata
├── quickstart.zig       # Example usage and integration tests
├── API_referance.md     # API reference documentation
├── python_script/       # Python utility scripts
│   ├── env_init.py      # Environment initialization script
│   ├── find_code_blocks.py   # Python utility for code extraction
│   └── find_final_answer.py  # Python utility for answer parsing
├── logs/                # Generated log files (JSON format)
├── zig-out/             # Build output directory
│   └── bin/             # Compiled binaries
├── .gitignore           # Git ignore rules
└── README.md            # This file
```

### Key Files

- **`rlm.zig`**: Main entry point with RLM struct and completion logic
- **`rlm_logger.zig`**: Handles all logging operations with JSON output
- **`types.zig`**: Shared type definitions (Metadata, QueryMetadata, etc.)
- **`prompt.zig`**: System prompt building from query metadata
- **`parsing.zig`**: Utilities to extract structured data from responses
- **`quickstart.zig`**: Runnable example demonstrating basic usage
- **`Model_info.zig`**: Model configurations and capabilities

## 🧪 test

run test：

```bash
zig test rlm.zig
zig test rlm_logger.zig
zig test prompt.zig
zig test parsing.zig
zig test Model_info.zig
zig test types.zig
```

run quickstart example：

```bash
zig test quickstart.zig
```

## 📖 Documentation

- [API Referance](API_referance.md) - Complete API documentation
- [quickstart](quickstart.zig) - Runnable code examples

Commit message:

Update README.md with roadmap

README.md, after:

<div align="center">

# Omni-RLM

### A High-Performance Recursive Language Model Framework

[![Zig](https://img.shields.io/badge/Zig-0.15.2-orange.svg)](https://ziglang.org/)

*Leverage the power of recursive reasoning in AI agents with type-safe, high-performance Zig*

[Overview](#-overview) •
[Features](#-features) •
[Installation](#installation) •
[Quick Start](#-quick-start) •
[Examples](#-usage-examples) •
[Project Structure](#-project-structure) •
[Documentation](#-documentation) •
[Roadmap](#-roadmap)

</div>

---

## 📖 Overview

Omni-RLM is a **high-performance [recursive language model framework](https://github.com/alexzhang13/rlm)** that enables AI agents to perform complex reasoning tasks through controlled recursive LLM calls. Built with Zig's zero-cost abstractions and memory safety features, it provides a robust foundation for production-grade AI applications.

### Why Omni-RLM?

- 🚀 **Blazing Fast**: Leveraging Zig's zero-cost abstractions and manual memory management for optimal performance
- 🔄 **Recursive Reasoning**: Support for multi-depth language model calls with fine-grained control
- 📝 **Production-Ready Logging**: Comprehensive structured logging for debugging and analysis
- 🔌 **Backend Agnostic**: Works with any OpenAI-compatible API (OpenAI, Qwen, Anthropic, etc.)
- 🎯 **Type-Safe**: Compile-time guarantees prevent runtime errors
- 💾 **Memory Efficient**: Explicit allocator control for predictable resource usage

## ✨ Features

| Feature | Description |
|---------|-------------|
| **Recursive Execution** | Execute language models with configurable recursion depth limits |
| **Query Tracking** | Automatic tracking of context length, type, and metadata |
| **Iteration Logging** | JSON-formatted logs for every iteration with full traceability |
| **Backend Flexibility** | Easy integration with OpenAI, Qwen, or any compatible LLM-API spec |
| **Memory Safety** | Built-in protection against memory leaks and undefined behavior |
| **Custom Prompts** | Override system prompts for specialized agent behaviors |

## Installation

### Prerequisites

- [Zig](https://ziglang.org/download/) 0.15.2 or later
- Python package `dill` for code execution environment

## 🚀 Quick Start

Here's a simple example to get you started:

```zig
const std = @import("std");
const RLM = @import("rlm.zig").RLM;
const RLMLogger = @import("rlm_logger.zig").RLMLogger;

pub fn main() !void {
    const allocator = std.heap.page_allocator;

    // Initialize logger
    const logger = try RLMLogger.init("./logs", "quickstart", allocator);

    // Configure RLM instance
    var rlm: RLM = .{
        .backend = "openai",
        .backend_kwargs = 
        \\{
        \\"base_url":"https://dashscope.aliyuncs.com/compatible-mode/v1/chat/completions",
        \\"api_key":"your-api-key-here",
        \\"model_name":"qwen-plus"
        \\}
        ,
        .environment = "local",
        .environment_kwargs = "{}",
        .max_depth = 1,
        .logger = logger,
        .allocator = allocator,
    };

    try rlm.init();
    defer rlm.deinit();

    // Make a completion request
    const prompt = "Print me the first 100 powers of two, each on a newline.";
    const p = try allocator.dupe(u8, prompt);
    defer allocator.free(p);
    
    const result = try rlm.completion(p, null);
    defer allocator.free(result.response);
    
    std.debug.print("Response: {s}\n", .{result.response});
    std.debug.print("Execution Time: {d}ms\n", .{result.execution_time});
}
```

## 💡 Usage Examples

### Configuring Different Backends

<details>
<summary><b>OpenAI GPT-4</b></summary>

```zig
var rlm: RLM = .{
    .backend = "openai",
    .backend_kwargs = 
    \\{
    \\"base_url":"https://api.openai.com/v1/chat/completions",
    \\"api_key":"sk-...",
    \\"model_name":"gpt-4"
    \\}
    ,
    .max_depth = 3,
    .max_iterations = 50,
    .allocator = allocator,
};
```
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Qwen (Alibaba Cloud)</b></summary>

```zig
var rlm: RLM = .{
    .backend = "openai",
    .backend_kwargs = 
    \\{
    \\"base_url":"https://dashscope.aliyuncs.com/compatible-mode/v1/chat/completions",
    \\"api_key":"sk-...",
    \\"model_name":"qwen-plus"
    \\}
    ,
    .max_depth = 2,
    .allocator = allocator,
};
```
</details>

<details>
<summary><b>Custom Backend</b></summary>

```zig
var rlm: RLM = .{
    .backend = "openai",
    .backend_kwargs = 
    \\{
    \\"base_url":"https://your-custom-api.com/v1/chat/completions",
    \\"api_key":"your-api-key",
    \\"model_name":"your-model"
    \\}
    ,
    .custom_system_prompt = "You are a specialized coding assistant...",
    .allocator = allocator,
};
```
</details>

### Working with Logs

The logger creates structured JSON logs that include:

```json
{
  "prompt": [{"role":"Your prompt concat with system message"}...],
  "response": "Model response",
  "code_blocks": {
    "code": "extracted code blocks if any",
    "results": {
        "stdout": "output from code execution",
        "stderr": "error output if any",
        "term": "exit status"
    }
  },
  "final_answer": "Extracted final answer if any",
  "execution_time": 1234//milliseconds
}
```

## 📁 Project Structure

```
rlm-zig/
├── rlm.zig              # Core RLM orchestrator
├── rlm_logger.zig       # Structured logging system
├── types.zig            # Type definitions and structs
├── prompt.zig           # Prompt construction utilities
├── parsing.zig          # Response parsing (code blocks, answers)
├── Model_info.zig       # Model configuration and metadata
├── quickstart.zig       # Example usage and integration tests
├── API_referance.md     # API reference documentation
├── python_script/       # Python utility scripts
│   ├── env_init.py      # Environment initialization script
│   ├── find_code_blocks.py   # Python utility for code extraction
│   └── find_final_answer.py  # Python utility for answer parsing
├── logs/                # Generated log files (JSON format)
├── zig-out/             # Build output directory
│   └── bin/             # Compiled binaries
├── .gitignore           # Git ignore rules
└── README.md            # This file
```

### Key Files

- **`rlm.zig`**: Main entry point with RLM struct and completion logic
- **`rlm_logger.zig`**: Handles all logging operations with JSON output
- **`types.zig`**: Shared type definitions (Metadata, QueryMetadata, etc.)
- **`prompt.zig`**: System prompt building from query metadata
- **`parsing.zig`**: Utilities to extract structured data from responses
- **`quickstart.zig`**: Runnable example demonstrating basic usage
- **`Model_info.zig`**: Model configurations and capabilities

## 🧪 test

run test：

```bash
zig test rlm.zig
zig test rlm_logger.zig
zig test prompt.zig
zig test parsing.zig
zig test Model_info.zig
zig test types.zig
```

run quickstart example：

```bash
zig test quickstart.zig
```

## 📖 Documentation

- [API Referance](API_referance.md) - Complete API documentation
- [quickstart](quickstart.zig) - Runnable code examples

## 📖 Roadmap

The team has proposed an initial [community roadmap](/ROADMAP.md) and wider community inputs are welcomed.
